.TH BINDPORT 1 "2026-07-03" "BindPort" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
bindport \- proxy-neutral local development port registry and runner
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bindport
.B --
.I command
.br
.B bindport
.B run
.RI [ service ]
.RI [ options ]
.B --
.I command
.br
.B bindport
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
BindPort wraps local development commands, assigns a stable loopback port,
records project and service identity in a local SQLite registry, and can render
configuration files for existing local proxy stacks. It does not bind ports 80
or 443, install certificates, mutate DNS, edit
.IR /etc/hosts ,
or run a privileged local edge proxy by default.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B run [service] [options] [-- command]
Run a command or configured service command with an assigned
.B PORT
environment variable.
.TP
.B -- command
Shortcut for wrapping a command with an assigned
.BR PORT .
.TP
.B reserve [service]
Hold a BindPort lease without running a child process.
.TP
.B reserve --all
Atomically reserve ports for every named service in the discovered project
config, scoped to the current worktree.
.TP
.B release [service|port]
Release a reserved lease by service identity or port.
.TP
.B status [--json]
Show registry status. Use
.B --json
for the stable status schema 1.0 machine output.
.TP
.B list [--json]
List projects and services in a grouped registry-wide inventory. Its JSON schema
is versioned separately from status.
.TP
.B registry export
Print a full registry debug/backup JSON snapshot. Its schema and SQLite user
version are separate from status schema 1.0.
.TP
.B open [service]
Print or open the best URL for a service.
.TP
.B port <service> [--project PROJECT]
Print only the decimal port for one active or reserved service in the current
project and worktree scope.
.TP
.B clean [options]
Remove stopped and stale registry entries. Stale cleanup requires confirmation
unless
.B --yes
is supplied.
.TP
.B config explain
Show resolved config fields and identity sources.
.TP
.B config validate
Validate config structure and report actionable errors.
.TP
.B hooks status
Inspect configured hook trust and execution state.
.TP
.B hooks trust|deny|reset [--scope worktree|repo] <hook|--all>
Manage local hook trust decisions. Hooks do not execute until explicitly
trusted.
.TP
.B doctor
Show bootstrap diagnostics for config, registry, listeners, and allocation.
.TP
.B doctor outputs
Validate output rendering setup without writing files.
.TP
.B dashboard [serve]
Serve the local dashboard.
.TP
.B dashboard start|status|stop
Control the background dashboard service.
.TP
.B render [output]
Render configured output files. Use
.B --dry-run
or
.B --diff
for non-writing previews,
.B --repair
for ownership reconciliation, and
.BR --verbose / -v
for diagnostics on standard error.
.TP
.B templates list|show|export
Inspect or export output templates.
.TP
.B init [--project|--user]
Create project config in the current directory or optional user fallback
config.
.SH RUN OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --env " NAME=VALUE"
Add a templated child environment variable.
.TP
.BI --hostname " template"
Set route hostname metadata.
.TP
.BI --route-url " template"
Set route URL metadata.
.TP
.BI --health-url " template"
Set service health check URL metadata.
.SH CLEAN OPTIONS
.TP
.B --dry-run
Show what would be removed without deleting entries.
.TP
.B --stopped
Remove stopped entries only.
.TP
.B --stale
Remove stale entries only.
.TP
.B --all
Remove stopped and stale entries. This is the default.
.TP
.B --json
Print machine-readable cleanup counts.
.TP
.B -y, --yes
Confirm stale entry deletion without prompting.
.SH DASHBOARD OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --host " ip"
Bind IP address. The default is
.BR 127.0.0.1 .
.TP
.BI --port " port"
Preferred dashboard port. The default is
.BR 27080 .
.TP
.BI --auth " required|disabled"
Set dashboard authentication mode.
.TP
.B --auth-required
Require bearer token access to dashboard data.
.TP
.B --no-auth
Disable dashboard bearer token checks.
.TP
.B --register-service
Record the dashboard in BindPort status.
.TP
.B --no-register-service
Do not record the dashboard in BindPort status.
.TP
.BI --token " token"
Bearer token value. Prefer
.B --token-env
to avoid exposing token values in process lists.
.TP
.BI --token-env " name"
Environment variable containing the bearer token.
.TP
.BI --allowed-host " host"
Additional accepted HTTP Host header.
.TP
.BI --static-dir " path"
Read dashboard assets from a local directory.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I .bindport.toml
Project config in the current repository or workspace.
.TP
.I .bindport.local.toml
Private machine-local override config. This file should not be committed.
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/bindport/config.toml
Optional user fallback config.
.TP
.I $XDG_STATE_HOME/bindport/registry.sqlite
Default SQLite registry path on Linux-style systems.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PORT
Assigned port injected into wrapped child processes.
.TP
.B BINDPORT_PROJECT
Project identity override.
.TP
.B BINDPORT_SERVICE
Service identity override.
.SH EXIT STATUS
BindPort-owned usage and fatal startup failures exit 1; no distinct numeric
range is reserved from children. Normal wrapped-child exit codes pass through.
On Unix, a child terminated by a signal is represented as 128 plus the signal
number. Help and version exit 0.
.SH SEE ALSO
Project documentation:
.UR https://github.com/bindport/bindport
.UE
